---
title: More personal tracking: Last.fm
---

Here's another thing I've recently fallen victim to using: Last.fm and
its wonderful scrobbling feature.

[Last.fm](http://www.last.fm) is a big ol' music database (though not as
deep (?) as [MusicBrainz](http://musicbrainz.org) with a killer feature:
being able to record every track you listen to. The verb (and noun) used
for this is *scrobbling*. A *scrobble* is a message you send to
Last.fm's servers, confirming that you listened to a certain song at a
certain time.

Scrobbling appeals to me because, hell, it's more statistics on myself,
and I like to think that I might have a use for it all one day. Logging
the songs I listen to at specific times is simple and could be useful or
interesting to analyse -- maybe estimate (? wrong, but close) the mood
of songs depending on what time of the day it's most often played.  Who
knows, maybe it'll somehow come in handy like [my recorded commands]({%
post_url command-sleuthing %}).

If you're averse to other companies having and using your data but want
(i.e. logging music you listen to), then there are some scrobblers which
let you keep a local log as well/instead. The main scrobbler I'm using,
`mpdscribble`, can record played songs in a very simple log file as well
as submitting to .fm, so there's something to look at if you're a \*nix
user.

If you don't mind Last.fm being an online affair but want a backup of
your data, then you're in luck. Last.fm provides a very nice, if
rather slow, full export feature. About 3 days after I asked to export
my data (a measly 750 scrobbles accrued (?) over the week I'd had my
account for) (? too long), I received an email with a link which only
lasts 7 days. Seems a bit cheapskatey (? careful with money ), but they
kindly provide separate CSV and JSON files, and timestamp using combined Unix times and ISO time formats :)

*(Note: The export feature seems to be recent, since the zip file your
data comes in includes a `readme.txt` with only the contents `Fill me
out`. Hopefully it'll be improved eventually!)*
